let's turn to the Middle East now the
United Nations says the amount of
humanitarian Aid entering Gaza has
decreased by 2/3 since Israel began its
military operation in Rafa earlier this
month the Israeli military says it has
established full operational control
over the fideli corridor along the Gaza
Egypt border discovering dozens of
rocket launchers and at least 20 crossb
smuggling tunnels there so far a
national security adviser to Israel's
primee Minister Benjamin Netanyahu says
he expects the war against has to
continue for at least another 7 months
let's go to Jerusalem now and speak to
our Middle East correspondent yolan Nell
um let's let's just talk first of all if
we can about um this fidelia Corridor
can you tell us a bit more what about
what it is and what Israel says it's
found yes this is the 14 km
strategically important strip of land uh
that lies on the Gaza Egypt border now
the Israelis saying that they have
effective control um of that Corridor
now and talking about what they have
found there saying there have been
multiple rocket launchers and rocket
launch sites they' found pointing out
that they say in recent weeks something
like 70 rockets and mortars have been
fired by Hamas from the Rafa area um
suggesting really that it was locating
some of these launch sites very close to
the border with Egypt uh to try to avoid
uh Israel going after them and perhaps
making a mistake and firing into Egypt
um they've also found they say some 20
tunnels which they believe were used to
smuggle weapons into Palestinian armed
groups like Hamas um and they say there
may be more of these tunnels they're
locating them and destroying them along
this border area now all of this is
likely to ratchet up tensions further uh
between Israel and Egypt Egypt's concern
will be that Israeli forces will try to
maintain a presence along this Border in
the longer term and also they've been
saying that you know Egyptian security
sources talking to the Egyptian media
that that the tunnels are being used
they say as an excuse by Israel to
justify its Rafa offensive um and they
say that uh they have dealt themselves
effectively with smuggling tunnels
particularly over the past decade okay
thank you so much Yan now for us there
live in Jerusalem we can speak now to
British Army veteran and chief executive
of the intelligence company Cil line
Justin Crump hello to you Justin how
we're just hearing it from yoland a
little bit about um what the Israeli
Army says that it's discovered how
significant is this that it now controls
that area of the
Border I mean it's a really important
piece of ground for Israel uh if you
think of any military force that's
attacking an adversary I mean one of the
things you want to do is surround the
adversary you want to cut that adversary
off uh from Supply and Hamas almost
certainly wasn't getting supplies
through Israel so Israeli suspicion has
always been on the border with Egypt um
certainly milit planning would assume
that there was some permeability of that
border whether it was the Rafa Crossing
whether it was tunnels obviously Egypt
would argue with that but from the
Israeli point of view controlling that
border Cuts Hass off um from further
Supply or does a lot to stop it from
doing that it also stops his Safe Haven
as you've heard there this um use of
that border area uh as an area that
Israel can't really strike because it's
too close to Egypt it's an area that
Hamas have used to stop our weapons to
launch weapons from uh and we've seen
examples of that and of course the
Israelis have found launch positions of
of rockets that were exploiting the
position so very important what we call
sort of vital ground or key terrain for
Israel in this war right and in terms of
the relations as y land was mentioning
between Egypt and uh Israel presumably
tensions will be heightened now because
of what's going on there yeah because
the agreement over Rafa goes back to
1979 and of course when Israel was in
the Gaza Strip there was an agreement
that Egyptian forces Israeli forces
would be matched by mutual agreement I
mean the two Nations have fought several
devastating conflicts in that area and
obviously neither side wanted to see the
other build up uh troops now obviously
that fell into abeyance when Hamas uh
were in Gaza when there was a blockade
of Gaza by both Egypt and Israel uh and
control of that U but we're now back to
the point that the Israelis are opposite
the Egyptians On the Border fence and
actually one Egyptian Soldier killed in
the last couple of days and what appears
to have been an exchange of fire with
the Israelis moving along the corridor
so um it certainly is more tension Egypt
arguing strongly that they have
controlled the tunnels you know and
saying as we've heard there it's an
excuse Israel pointing out the ttles but
to be fair it's not clear that all of
them crossed the border um but they're
certainly present along that area it was
certainly a big Hamas operational area
so I think Israel feeling Vindicated but
perhaps not as much as they'd like Egypt
feeling defensive but maybe with
something to actually take on board here
so a lot of surface tension how much
it's going to really affect relations uh
I think to be seen at the okay and what
about um this National Security adviser
to Benjamin Netanyahu saying that they
expect the war against Hamas to go on
for at least another seven
months I mean if you think of the sort
of conflict this is and you think back
to say the war on terror or something
like that the the military phase can
sometimes be the easiest part of it and
then you've got to build afterwards and
this ties in I think with the um the US
commentary that they want to see a plan
for the day after the fighting stops
because the fighting won't really stop I
mean I don't think Israel can achieve a
purely military Victory against Hamas
that settles this and then there will be
peace and rebuilding and prosperity this
is going to be a long running um saw for
Israel I think in terms of how they deal
with the future security and rebuilding
of the Gaza Strip uh and it's a real
question as to how Israel avoids it
going on not just another seven months
but another seven years I think at
various levels of intensity and
certainly they haven't achieved their
even stated military aims uh yet let
alone their political ones okay well
thank you for your thoughts appreciate
your time that's Justin Crump thanks
around